# LScript Documentation

LScript is a high-level interpreted programming language, with a similar syntax to typed languages such as Java and C#, while keeping a smoother feel.

[Syntax Rules](#Syntax-Rules)  
[Types](#Types)  
[Default Values](#Default-Values)  
[Conditionals](#Conditionals)  
[Defining Functions](#Function-Definitions)  
[Calling Functions](#function-calling)  
[Loops](#Loops)  
[Comments](#Comments)  
[Importing](#Importing)  
[Built-in Functions](#Built-in-Functions)  
[Files](#files)  

&nbsp;

## Syntax Rules:
- Conditionals, loops, and function declarations must all be surrounded with braces '{}'.
    - All other lines, excluding [comments](#Comments), must end with a semicolon ';'.
- To format a string inline, you can either use the [format](#format) built-in function, or place a % symbol before a variable name to insert its string value.
    - Example:
    ```
    str language = "LScript";
    print("My favorite programming language is %language!");
    ```
- Strings may start with either single or double quotes, but must end with the same symbol they started with.
    - The escape character '\\' may also be used in strings to signify line breaks ('\n'), tabs('\t'), or to display the following character, regardless of what that character is.
    - Example:
    ```
    str myFirstString = "This string starts with single quotes!";
    str mySecondString = 'This one has single quotes.';
    str escapeString = "And this one has a \n newline.";
    ```
- When used in a conditional or as a boolean, any non-boolean value will return true unless it is equal to null.
- Language operators are as follows:
    - ### + : Addition
        - Used for appending to lists/maps [see also: [append](#append)], string manipulation, and arithmetic
    - ### - : Subtraction
        - Used for removing from lists/maps [see also: [pop](#pop), [remove](#remove)], string manipulation, and arithmetic
    - ### * : Multiplication
        - Used for both string multiplication and arithmetic
    - ### / : Division
        - Used for both string multiplication and arithmetic
    - ### % : Modulo
        - Used for arithmetic remainders
    - ### ^ : Power
        - Used for arithmetic powers
    - ### Boolean Operators (return true or false)
        - ### == : Boolean Equality
            - A check for equality between two values
        - ### ! : Boolean Negator
            - Reverses the subsequent boolean value
        - ### != : Boolean Inequality
            - A check for inequality between two values (opposite of boolean equality)
        - ### < : Less Than
            - Returns true if the value to the left of the operator is less than the value on the right
        - ### > : Greater Than
            - Returns true if the value to the left of the operator is greater than the value on the right
        - ### <= : Less Than or Equal
            - Returns true if the value to the left of the operator is less than or equal to the value on the right
        - ### >= : Greater Than or Equal
            - Returns true if the value to the left of the operator is greater than or equal to the value on the right
        - ### & : Logical And
            - Returns true if the values to either side of the operator return true
        - ### | : Logical Or
            - Returns true if the either or both of the values next to the operator return true

## Types
The recognized types in LScript are as follows:
- ### Dynamic Types 
    - #### var 
        - a basic type for dynamic values 
    - #### const
        - a constant variable


- ### Numbers
    - #### int
        - an integer value, ranging from -2,147,483,648 to 2,147,483,647
    - #### float
        - a floating-point number
    - #### num
        - represents an int or float
    - #### byte
        - a single byte of data, ranging from 0x00 to 0xff


- ### Collections
    - #### list
        - a collection of values of any type, surrounded by [ and ].
    - #### map
        - a collection that maps keys of any type to values of any type, surrounded by { and }.
            - Keys and values are separated by colons ':'
            - Key-value pairs are separated by commas ','


-  #### str
    - a string of characters
-  #### bool
    - a boolean representing either 'true' or 'false'
-  #### file
    - an external file, opened using one or more open modes, for writing to and/or reading from
-  #### void
    - represents the absence of a value
-  #### nullType
    - only used by 'null'; represents an empty value
-  #### function
    - a function that can be called

&nbsp;

## Default Values
When a variable is initialized, most of the time, it will default to null.<br>
However, certain types will default to values:
<ul>
    <li>ints, nums, floats, and bytes will all default to 0.</li>
    <li>strs will default to "", or an empty string.</li>
    <li>bools will default to false.</li>
    <li>lists and maps will default to [] and {}, respectively (empty lists/maps).</li>
</ul>

## Conditionals
LScript currently has support for conditionals through if, elif, and else statements.
### Syntax
```
int i = 1;
if (i == 0) {
    print("i equals 0");
} elif (i == 1) {
    print("i equals 1");
} else {
    print("i does not equal 0 or 1");
}
```
```
Output: i equals 1
```

If and elif statements require a boolean expression (or other value for a null-check), wrapped in parentheses. Additionally, all three statements require the use of braces '{}' around internal statements.

## Function Definitions
LScript currently has support for defining functions, both anonymously and with identifiers.
### Syntax
```
// This function adds two numbers and returns the result.
func add (int a, int b) : int {
    return a + b;
}

// This function is created anonymously and stored in a variable.
function printHi = func () {
    print("Hello!");
}
```

&nbsp;

### Declaration Signature

- To define a function in LScript, the 'func' keyword is required.
- Optionally, after 'func', an identifier can be used to [call the function](#function-calling) in the future.
- Following this, all functions need a pair of parentheses '()',containing all arguments for the function (if it has any).
    - All arguments must be defined with types (can be var). Constant values are not allowed as arguments.
- The final piece of a function definition is return types.
    - If no return types are desired, this is not required; the default return type is void.
    - Any number of types can be declared after a colon ':', separated by commas - However, they must all be returned in every return statement.

### Function Contents
- Function contents must be wrapped in braces '{}'.
- Functions can run any code, including calling other functions, setting variables, or doing operations - but all variable inside of a function are lost after it is finished unless the are returned.
- At any point in a function, value(s) can be returned to the call by using 
    ```
    return [value(s)];
    ```
    - every return statement in a function must return the same value type(s) as are declared in the [signature](#declaration-signature).


## Function Calling
Any defined function, including [yhose built into LScript](#built-in-function), can be easily called using parentheses '()'.

### Syntax
```
// This function adds two numbers and returns the result.
func add (int a, int b) : int {
    return a + b;
}

print(add(2, 3));
```
```
Output: 5
```
To call a function, use the function's identifier followed by parentheses.
- Inside the parenthese, you can place arguments matching the types defined in the function's [definition](#function-definitions).
- After the function has finished, the call will be evaluated as its return. (of the type defined in its declaration)
- Anonymous functions stored in variables can be called the same way, by simply putting parameters in parentheses after the variable's name.

## Loops


## Comments


## Importing


## Built-in Functions


## Files